Magnetic sail
A magnetic sail is a proposed method of spacecraft propulsion that uses a static magnetic field to deflect a plasma wind of charged particles radiated by the Sun or a Star thereby transferring momentum to accelerate or decelerate a spacecraft. Most approaches require little to no propellant and thus are a form of Field propulsion. A magnetic sail could also thrust against a planetary ionosphere or magnetosphere. Important use cases are: a modest force from the solar wind sustainable for a long period of time; deceleration in the interstellar medium and the plasma wind of a destination Star following interstellar travel at relativistic speeds achieved by some other means; and efficient deceleration in a planetary ionosphere. Plasma characteristics for the Solar wind, a planetary ionosphere and the interstellar medium and the specifics of the magnetic sail design determine achievable performance; such as, thrust, required power and mass.

History of concept
Dana Andrews and Robert Zubrin first proposed the magnetic sail concept in 1988. Andrews was working on use of a magnetic scoop to gather interstellar material as propellant for a nuclear electric ion drive spacecraft, allowing the craft to operate in a similar manner to a Bussard ramjet. Andrews asked Zubrin to help compute the magnetic scoop drag against the interplanetary medium, which turned out to be much greater than the ion drive thrust. The ion drive component of the system was dropped, and use of the concept of using the magnetic scoop as a magnetic sail or Magsail (MS) was born. Published magsail analysis was done for interstellar in 1988, interplanetary in 1989, planetary orbital propulsion in 1991 and a detailed design in 2000. Freeland did further analysis in 2015 for Project Icarus that used a more accurate model of the magnetic field and showed that the Andrews and Zubrin results for drag (thrust) were optimistic by a factor of 3.1In 2016 Gros published results for magsail use for deceleration in the Interstellar medium. In 2017, Crowl documented an analysis for a mission starting near the Sun and destined for Planet nine. Another mission profile for the magsail is heliocentric transfers, as described in 2013 by Quarta, in 2019 by Bassetto, and in 2020 by Perakis. 
A drawback of the magsail design was that a large (50–100 km radius) superconducting loop weighing on the order of 100 tonnes (100,000 kg) was required. In 2000, Winglee proposed a Mini-Magnetospheric Plasma Propulsion (M2P2) design that injected low energy plasma into a much smaller coil with much lower mass that required low power. Simulations predicted impressive performance relative to mass and required power, a major factor being a claimed   magnetic field falloff rate as compared with the classical   falloff rate of a magnetic dipole in a vacuum. A number of critiques raised issues: that the assumed magnetic field falloff rate was optimistic and that thrust was overestimated as well, an analysis indicating that predicted thrust was over ten orders of magnitude optimistic since the majority of the solar wind momentum was delivered to the magnetotail and current leakages through the magnetopause and not to the spacecraft, and that conservation of magnetic flux in the region outside the magnetosphere was not considered. 
Starting in 2003 Funaki and others published a series of theoretical, simulation and experimental investigations at JAXA in collaboration with Japanese universities addressing some of the issues from criticisms of M2P2 and named their approach the MagnetoPlasma Sail (MPS). In 2011 Funaki and Yamakawa authored a chapter in a book that is a good reference for magnetic sail theory and concepts. MPS research resulted in many published papers that advanced the understanding of physical principles for magnetic sails. Results published in 2013 by Funaki and others found that best performance occurred when the injected plasma had a lower density and velocity than considered in M2P2 where ion drift created an equatorial ring current that augmented the magnetic moment of the coil, which simulations indicated achieved a thrust gain on the order of 10 for smaller magnetospheres as compared with an MHD modeled magnetic sail. Investigations continued reporting increased thrust experimentally and numerically considering use of an Magnetoplasmadynamic thruster (aka MPD Arc jet in Japan), multiple antenna coils, and a multi-pole MPD thruster. 
John Slough of the University of Washington documented in 2004 and 2006 results of NASA Institute of Advanced Concepts (NIAC) funded research, development and experimentation for a more efficient method to generate the static magnetic dipole for a magnetic sail using a design called the Plasma magnet (PM). The design used a pair of small perpendicularly oriented coils powered by an alternating current to generate a Rotating magnetic field (RMF) operating a frequency too fast for positively charged ions to react, but slow enough to force electrons into co-rotation with the RMF without creating excessive collisions. This system created a large current disc composed of electrons captured from the plasma wind within a static disk of captured positive ions. The reports predicted substantial improvements in terms of reduced coil size (and hence mass) and markedly lower power requirements for significant thrust. An important factor in these predictions was a hypothesized 1/r magnetic field falloff rate as assumed for M2P2. In 2022 a spaceflight trial dubbed Jupiter Observing Velocity Experiment (JOVE) proposed using a Plasma magnet based sail for a spacecraft named Wind Rider using the solar wind to accelerate away from a point near Earth and decelerate against the magnetosphere of Jupiter. 
A 2012 study by Kirtley and Slough investigated using the plasma magnet technology to use the plasma in the ionosphere of a planetary as a braking mechanism and was called the Plasma Magnetoshell. This paper restated the magnetic field falloff rate for a plasma magnet as 1/r2. Kelly and Little in 201 and 2021published simulation results showing that the magnetoshell was more efficient than Aerocapture braking for orbital insertion around Neptune.
In 2021 Zhenyu Yang and others published an analysis, numerical calculations and experimental verification for a propulsion system that was a combination of the magnetic sail and the Electric sail called an electromagnetic sail. A superconducting magsail coil augmented by an electron gun at the coil's center generates an electric field as in an electric sail that deflects positive ions in the plasma wind thereby providing additional thrust, which could reduce overall system mass.


Modes of operationEdit
Magnetic sail modes of operation cover the mission profile and environment usually involving plasma such as the solar wind, a planetary ionosphere or the interstellar medium. A plasma environment has fundamental parameters of the number of ions of type   (with atomic number  ) in a unit volume  , the average mass of each ion type accounting for isotopes   (kg), and the number of electrons per unit volume   each with electron mass   (kg). A plasma is quasi-neutral meaning that on average there is no electrical charge, that is  .[30] An average mass density per unit volume of a plasma environment   (  for stellar wind,   for planetary ionosphere,   for interstellar medium) is   (kg/m3). The velocity distribution of ions and electrons is another important parameter but often analyses use only the average velocity for a plasma wind   (m/s).

Physical principlesEdit
Physical principles involved include: interaction of magnetic fields with moving charged particles; an artificial magnetosphere model analogous to the Earth's magnetosphere, MHD and kinematic mathematical models for interaction of an artificial magnetosphere with a plasma flow characterized by density and velocity, and performance measures; such as, force achieved, energy requirements and the mass of the magnetic sail system.
Magnetic field interaction with charged particlesEdit
An ion or electron with charge q in a plasma moving at velocity v in a magnetic field B and electric field E is treated as an idealized point charge in the Lorentz force  . This means that the force on an ion or electron is proportional to the product of their charge q and velocity component   perpendicular to the magnetic field B. A magnetic sail design introduces a magnetic field into a plasma flow which under certain conditions deflects the electrons and ions from their original trajectory with the particle's momentum transferred to the sail and hence the spacecraft thereby creating thrust.[31] An electric sail uses an electric field E that under certain conditions interact with charged particles to create thrust.

Performance measuresEdit
Important measures that determine the relative performance of different magnetic sail systems include: mass of the field source generator and its power and energy requirements; thrust achieved; thrust to weight ratio, any limitations and constraints, and propellant system exhausted, if any . Mass of the field source   in the Magsail design was relatively large and subsequent designs strove to reduce this measure. Total spacecraft mass is  , where   is the payload mass. Power requirements are significant in some designs and add to field source mass. Thrust is the plasma wind force   for a particular plasma environment with acceleration  . The thrust to weight ratio  is also an important performance measure. Other limitations and constraints may be specific to a particular design. The M2P2 and MPS designs, as well as potentially the plasma magnet design, exhaust some plasma as part of inflating the magnetospheric bubble and these cases also have a specific impulse and effective exhaust velocity performance measure.

Advantages and disadvantagesEdit
One advantage of magnetic or solar sails over (chemical or ion) reaction thrusters is that little to no reaction mass is depleted or carried in the craft. Acceleration or deceleration against a planetary magnetosphere is possible.
A disadvantage for interplanetary travel is that acceleration is only in the direction of a plasma wind away from the Sun or a star or deceleration in only in the direction opposite to the plasma wind from the Sun or a star. Only deceleration is possible in the interstellar medium.
Fictional uses in popular cultureEdit
Magnetic sails have become a popular trope in many works of science fiction although the solar sail is more popular:
The ancestor of the magsail, the Bussard magnetic scoop, first appeared in science-fiction in Poul Anderson's 1967 short story To Outlive Eternity, which was followed by the novel Tau Zero in 1970.
The magsail appears as a crucial plot device in The Children's Hour, a Man-Kzin Wars novel by Jerry Pournelle and S.M. Stirling (1991).
It also features prominently in the science-fiction novels of Michael Flynn, particularly in The Wreck of the River of Stars (2003); this book is the tale of the last flight of a magnetic sail ship when fusion rockets based on the Farnsworth-Hirsch Fusor have become the preferred technology.
GURPS Spaceships features both solar sails and magnetic sails as possible methods of spacecraft propulsion.
Although not referred to as a "magnetic sail," the concept was used in the novel Encounter with Tiber by Buzz Aldrin and John Barnes as a braking mechanism to decelerate starships from relativistic speed.

