Mini-magnetospheric plasma propulsion (M2P2) 
In 2000 Winglee and others proposed a design order to reduce the size and weight of a magnetic sail and named it mini-magnetospheric plasma propulsion (M2P2). The figure based upon illustrates the M2P2 design, which is the same as the Magneto plasma sail (MPS) design. Starting at the center with a solenoid coil of radius   (m) of  =1,000 turns carrying a radio frequency current that generates a helicon[54] wave that injects plasma fed from a source into a coil of radius   (m) that carries a current of   (A), which generates a magnetic field. The excited injected plasma enhances the magnetic field and generates a miniaturized magnetosphere around the spacecraft, analogous to the heliopause where the Sun injected plasma encounters the interstellar medium, coronal mass ejections or the Earth's magnetotail. The injected plasma created an environment that analysis and simulations showed had a magnetic field with a falloff rate of   as compared with the classical model of a   falloff rate, making the much smaller coil significantly more effective. The pressure of the inflated plasma along with the stronger magnetic field pressure at a larger distance due to the lower falloff rate would stretch the magnetic field and inflate a magnetospheric bubble around the spacecraft.
The 2000 Winglee paper described a design and reported results adapted from the Earth's magnetosphere. Parameters for the coil and solenoid were  =2.5 cm and for the coil  = 0.1 m, 6 orders of magnitude less than the magsail coil with correspondingly much lower mass. An estimate for the weight of the coil was 10 kg and 40 kg for the plasma injection source and other infrastructure. Reported results from Figure 2 were   4x10-3 T at   10 km and from Figure 3 an extrapolated result with a plasma injection jet force  10−3 N resulting in a thrust force of   1 N. The magnetic-only sail force from equation MHD.3 is  =3x10−11 N and thus M2P2 reported a thrust gain of 4x1010.
Since M2P2 injects ionized gas at a rate of  (kg/s) that can be viewed as a propellant it has a specific impulse   where   (m/s2) is the acceleration of Earth's gravity. Winglee stated  =0.5 (kg/day) and therefore  =17,621. The equivalent exhaust velocity   is 173 km/s for 1 N of thrust force. Winglee assumed total propellant mass of 30 kg and therefore propellant would run out in 60 days.
In 2003, Khazanov published MagnetoHydroDynamic (MHD) and kinetic studies that confirmed some aspects of M2P2 but raised issues that the sail size was too small, and that very small thrust would result and also concluded that the hypothesized   magnetic field falloff rate was closer to  . The plasma density plots from Khazanov indicated a relatively high density inside the magnetospheric bubble as compared with the external solar wind region that differed significantly from those published by Winglee where the density inside the magnetospheric bubble was much less than outside in the external solar wind region.
A detailed analysis by Toivanen and others in 2004compared a theoretical model of Magsail, dubbed Plasma-free Magnetospheric Propulsion (PFMP) versus M2P2 and concluded that the thrust force predicted by Winglee and others was over ten orders of magnitude optimistic since the majority of the solar wind momentum was delivered to the magnetotail and current leakages through the magnetopause and not to the spacecraft. Their comments also indicated that the magnetic field lines may not close near enough to the coil to achieve significant transfer of force. Their analysis made an analogy to the Heliospheric current sheet as an example in astrophysics where the magnetic field could falloff at a rate of between   and  . They also analyzed current sheets reported by Winglee from the magnetopause to the spacecraft in the windward direction and a current sheet in the magnetotail. Their analysis indicated that the current sheets needed to pass extremely close to the spacecraft to impart significant force could generate significant heat and render this leverage impractical.
In 2005, Cattell and others published comments regarding M2P2 that included a lack of magnetic flux conservation in the region outside the magnetosphere that was not considered in the Khazanov studies. Their analysis concluded in Table 1 that Winglee had significantly underestimated the required sail size, mass, required magnetic flux and asserted that the hypothesized   magnetic field falloff rate was not possible.
The expansion of the magnetic field using injected plasma was demonstrated in a large vacuum chamber on Earth, but quantification of thrust was not part of the experiment. The accompanying presentation has some good animations that illustrate physical principles described in the report. A 2004 Winglee paper primarily focused on usage of M2P2 for electromagnetic shielding. Beginning in 2003, the Magneto plasma sail design further investigated the plasma injection augmentation of the magnetic field, used larger coils and reported more modest gains.

